docs(adr): ADR-22: Per-subspace token factory (#1128)
desmos-labs/desmos: docs/architecture/adr-022-per-subspace-token-factory.md

# ADR 022: Per-subspace token factory

## Changelog
- April 28th, 2023: First draft;

## Status

Draft

## Abstract

> This ADR introduces a new feature that enables the subspace admins to create, mint and burn a subspace related
> coin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ADR introduces a new feature that allows subspace admins to create, mint and burn new tokens. 
```

## Context

> Desmos is a social network protocol that allows users to create, share, and engage with content 
> on a decentralized platform. 
> Currently, to post or interact with the content in a subspace you need to pay the gas fee using DSM. 
> This have the consequence of not giving any financial incentive on creating a social network on Desmos.

Reviewer: I've improved the context with the help of ChatGPT
```suggestion
Desmos is a social network protocol that allows users to create, share, and engage with content on a decentralized platform. It also provides the ability to create subspaces, which represent applications built on top of Desmos.

Currently, to post or interact with content within a subspace on Desmos, users are required to pay the gas fee using DSM (Desmos native token). This means that there is no direct financial incentive for creating a social network on Desmos itself.

By allowing subspace admins to mint custom tokens, we are going to enable the implementation of a custom tokenomic system within the subspace. This means that when users create or interact with content stored within a particular subspace, they may earn or spend these custom tokens. This will provide a new level of flexibility and incentive for users to actively participate within the subspaces.
```

## Decision

> We will wrap the Osmosis [Token Factory module](https://docs.osmosis.zone/osmosis-core/modules/tokenfactory/)

Reviewer: Should we use the (hopefully more stable) CosmWasm module instead as @dadamu linked [here](https://github.com/desmos-labs/desmos/pull/1128/files#r1184576805)?

Author: Yes I think it's better if we use the CosmWasm module since don't depends on a forked cosmos sdk with a modified bank module.

with the following modifications:

> 1. Instead of use the token creator address to compose the coin denom we will use the subspace treasury address
>    as following: `factory/{trasury_address}/subdenom`;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Instead of using the token creator address to compose the coin denom, we will use the subspace treasury address: `factory/{trasury_address}/subdenom`;
```

> 2. All the operations of `CreateDenom`, `Mint`, `Burn`, `SetDenomMetadata`, `SetBeforeSendHook` and

Reviewer 2: I saw `wasmd/tokenfactory` removes `SetBeforeSendHook` and `ForceTransfer`, see:
https://github.com/CosmWasm/token-factory/blob/main/x/tokenfactory/keeper/msg_server.go

As `ForceTransfer` is allowed admins to transfer tokens any users to other users forcely, and `SetBeforeSendHook` is a function to link between CW20 and tokenfactory tokens, which are not useful to our subspace tokens, both methods can be removed.

Reviewer: @dadamu Is it possible to use the `SetBeforeSendHook` function to somehow implement a custom tokenomics, in your opinion? Do you see any remote possibility that this might be worth keeping anyway?

Reviewer: Thanks @dadamu for the detailed explanation. I agree then we should exclude it.

> 2. All the operations of `CreateDenom`, `Mint`, `Burn`, `SetDenomMetadata`, `SetBeforeSendHook` and
>    `ForceTransfer` can only be performed by subspace treasury;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Only the subspace treasury will be able to perform the admin-related operations.
```

> 3. The `CreateDenom` action will burn the coins instead of send them to the community pool.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The `CreateDenom` action will burn `dsm` instead of send them to the community pool.  
```

> 3. The `CreateDenom` action will burn the coins instead of send them to the community pool.  

Reviewer: I'm actually very hesitant in deciding whether we should burn the paied fee, or make the token creation free. 

By **burning** the fees, we are adding yet-another DSM burning mechanism which, combined with the burning of the fees while setting a custom subspace fee token (ADR-21), will increment the burning rate of DSM. However, I think if requiring users all these DSM first to create the token and then to set it as a fee token is actually something good to do. 

By **not burning** we are making it easier for users to create their tokens, but we are opening up to possible spam attacks. 

What are your thoughts @dadamu @manu0466?

Reviewer 2: To prevent spam attacks issue, we can leverage `x/fees` to have a proposal to define the fees of `CreateDenom`, then have burning mechanism on `x/fees` in the future. What do you think?

Author: I think that to prevent spam attacks it's better if the `CreateDenom` operation requires the subspace admin to **burn** some DSM. This will prevent spam attacks and disincetives people from creating denoms without a strong reason also sisnce we are issuing a new coin on Desmos it's better from a tokenomics prospective to burn DSM instead of pay a fee to issue a new denom.

> With this module subspace admins will be able to create a coin that can be used to pay for 

Reviewer 2: The intension is having custom tokenomic for subspace easily, rather than paying subspace transactions.

> With this module subspace admins will be able to create a coin that can be used to pay for 
> subspace related transactions after a governance proposal.

Reviewer: I think we can omit this. It's already inside the _Context_ section anyway
```suggestion
```

> ### `Msg` Service

Reviewer: There's no need to report this section if we're going to wrap another module's message. We can simply say what are the changes (i.e. adding a `subspace_id` field to the messages) instead.

Currently, to post or interact with content within a subspace on Desmos, users are required to pay the gas fee using DSM (Desmos native token). This means that there is no direct financial incentive for creating a social network on Desmos itself.

By allowing subspace admins to mint custom tokens, we are going to enable the implementation of a custom tokenomic system within the subspace. This means that when users create or interact with content stored within a particular subspace, they may earn or spend these custom tokens. This will provide a new level of flexibility and incentive for users to actively participate within the subspaces.

## Decision

We will wrap the CosmWasm [Token Factory module](https://github.com/CosmWasm/token-factory/blob/main/x/tokenfactory)
with the following modifications:
1. Instead of using the token creator address to compose the coin denom, we will use the subspace treasury address: `factory/{trasury_address}/subdenom`;
2. Only the subspace treasury will be able to perform the admin-related operations.
3. The `CreateDenom` action will burn `dsm` instead of send them to the community pool.  

> ### `Msg` Service

Reviewer 2: As we decided to have a burning mechanism, we need to define a governance message, like:
https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/proto/cosmos/auth/v1beta1/tx.proto#L20

# ADR 022: Per-subspace token factory

## Changelog
- April 28th, 2023: First draft;
- May 8th, 2023: First review;
- May 9th, 2023: Second review;

## Status

> Draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accepted Not Implemented
```

> Accepted Not Implemented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ACCEPTED Not Implemented
```

By allowing subspace admins to mint custom tokens, we are going to enable the implementation of a custom tokenomic system within the subspace. This means that when users create or interact with content stored within a particular subspace, they may earn or spend these custom tokens. This will provide a new level of flexibility and incentive for users to actively participate within the subspaces.

## Decision

We will wrap the CosmWasm [Token Factory module](https://github.com/CosmWasm/token-factory/blob/main/x/tokenfactory)
with the following modifications:
1. Instead of using the token creator address to compose the coin denom, we will use the subspace treasury address: `factory/{trasury_address}/subdenom`;
2. Only the subspace treasury will be able to perform the admin-related operations.
3. The `CreateDenom` action will burn `dsm` instead of send them to the community pool.  

### `Msg` Service
The messages used from this module will be the same as [CosmWasm](https://github.com/CosmWasm/token-factory/blob/main/proto/osmosis/tokenfactory/v1beta1/tx.proto)
with the following modifications: 

> 1. Addition of a `subspace_id` field to all the messages;
> 2. Remove the `MsgChangeAdmin` since in our case the admin will be the subspace treasury and it will not be allowed to change it;
> 3. Addition of a governance message `MsgUpdateParams` to update the amount of coins that a subspace admin need to burn to execute `MsgCreateDenom`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Addition of a `subspace_id` field to all the messages, in order to identify for which subspace the operations are performed;
2. Removal of the `MsgChangeAdmin` message, since the allowed admin will only be the subspace treasury account;
3. Addition of a `MsgUpdateParams` message, in order to update the amount of coins that a subspace admin need to burn to execute a `MsgCreateDenom`.  
```

> Here is the Msg service for the `MsgUpdateParams` that we add to the CosmWasm tokenfactory module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the Msg service for the `MsgUpdateParams` that we are going to add to the CosmWasm tokenfactory module:
```

  // parameters. The authority defaults to the x/gov module account.
  rpc UpdateParams(MsgUpdateParams) returns (MsgUpdateParamsResponse);
}

// MsgUpdateParams is the Msg/UpdateParams request type.
message MsgUpdateParams {
  option (cosmos.msg.v1.signer) = "authority";

  // authority is the address that controls the module (defaults to x/gov unless
  // overwritten).
  string authority = 1 [ (cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString" ];

  // params defines the parameters to update.
  //
  // NOTE: All parameters must be supplied.
  Params params = 2 [ (gogoproto.nullable) = false ];
}

// MsgUpdateParamsResponse defines the response structure for executing a
// MsgUpdateParams message.
message MsgUpdateParamsResponse {}

// Params are the module parameters.
message Params {
  repeated cosmos.base.v1beta1.Coin denom_creation_fee = 1 [
    (gogoproto.castrepeated) = "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/types.Coins",
    (gogoproto.moretags) = "yaml:\"denom_creation_fee\"",
    (gogoproto.nullable) = false
  ];
}
```

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

The solution outlined above is fully backward compatible since we are just adding a new module.

### Positive

> - Enable other projects to have economic incentives on building on Desmos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow subspace admins to create their custom denominations enabling custom tokenomics
```
